---
layout: post
author: the cyborg
title: Being an autistic woman in an industry that thinks it's neurotypical - Part 2
permalink: 'archived/being-audhd-pt-2'
---

<details>
<summary><b>AUTHOR NOTE</b></summary>
<i>This was originally posted on my WordPress blog, which I have deleted after migrating the blog's posts to this website in November 2025. Differences from the original are minimal and include: changing "neurodiverse" to "neurodivergent" across the post, adding a link to imgur with screenshots of a Xitter post no longer accessible to all, adding in paragraphs to reduce the wall of text, removing run-on sentences and their poor grammar, and in hindsight maybe I should have split out the mind map fangirling into another fucking post. 😅</i>
</details>
\
If you're coming to this post, <b><a href="/archived/being-audhd-pt-1">please check out part 1 first</a></b> - all the experiences I laid out there taught me a lot about who I was and how it could further my career leading up to working on Edge, even without knowing that I'm autistic. I learned I'm extremely passionate about helping people and fostering close relationships, I earned specialization in escalation operations and know how to convince people to do what I am asking for, and I understand what it takes to run a variety of communities without being whatever toxic person I was when I lived in Colorado.\
\
I love data, am passionate about how to protect it, and wanted to use all of this to make meaningful changes within a product. I knew coming into the loop interviews for the Edge team what skills I could highlight, explain my weaknesses and how I work around them, and show how passionate I was about improving the lives of everyone. (Could I say passionate more? I need another synonym for that. 🤭)\
\
We're up to December 2019 now. My role on the Microsoft Edge team allowed me to flourish, I was offered the chance to build the community how <b>_I_</b> wanted without restrictions that would render my superpowers useless. I _absolutely_ give the credit to both my former manager and my assigned mentor. I connected with them really well - my manager was a huge supporter in me being the best and most authentic me, and my mentor kept me grounded in the face of corporate bullshit; I learned how to play the game at Microsoft very quickly.\
\
Oh, _what game_, you ask? It's a popularity game, and if anyone tells you otherwise they are either blind or lying - if the people who are looking at rewards for the year know what you are doing and have done, you get rewarded for it, even if the impact isn't in hard data. I know this because my role _consistently_ didn't have hard data to prove what I did, but everyone on the team knew me and valued what I offered to the broader team. If there's one thing that I learned how to do on Edge, it was making myself _really_ popular, very quickly, as the new communications owner and engagement specialist for the Edge Insiders and engineering team.\
\
I had no idea at the time that was thanks to my autism - [autistic women tend to be way more social](https://www.autism.org/women-in-autism/#phenotype) than their male counterparts (_but also tend to get taken advantage of more_) and I often describe myself as an extroverted introvert (or occasionally an introverted extrovert 😉). Being the person everyone knew, and being someone that everyone loved (_their words, not mine, I have troubles seeing this, tHaNkS aUtIsM_), my impact was well beyond numbers, and I was rewarded year after year for how good I was for the team.\
\
Everyone talks about it at Microsoft but it's a trip to experience first hand the firehose of becoming a Full Time Employee there the first time. It's overwhelming but I thrive in hectic situations like this - I was learning something new, which is inherently _not boring_, and that is key for some autistic and people with ADHD to thrive in a role. About 8 months into the role, mid-2020, I felt the stress building and could tell my Lamictal wasn't covering my anxiety anymore. My CBT wasn't sticking, I was having panic attacks daily, crying from stress. I went back into therapy after my primary put me on Seroquel to reduce the new anxiety and the impact it was having on my sleep.\
\
This helped a lot, actually, but it wasn't perfect. The pandemic and political climate wasn't helping anything. I feel a lot of emotions, _all the time_, and when emotions are high from others I absorb it. It's not fun, and 2020 was brutal for so many of us for so many reasons. My connection to emotions caused a lot of overwhelming bullshit to happen in my brain, combined with a great fear of the events unfolding in my country. The company encouraged people to take the time they needed to recover from whatever burnout they were feeling, but I don't think a lot of people understand how much that time impacted the neurodivergent - stress reduces my ability to compensate and mask, causing a few issues both at work and home (and [currently causing me depression](https://imgur.com/a/juv1QpT)).\
\
We go through our first re-org on the Edge team shortly after; the team's Product head was moved to another Microsoft team in favor of the Engineering lead, moving Edge to run under him moving forward. This was a worry for me on the team because that Product head knew the importance of my role and carved out budget to ensure we got someone like me into the seat for the Edge Insiders. This re-org ended up giving my immediate team some engineers we desperately needed to help us achieve some of the projects we wanted to deliver to the Edge Insiders - I had some automation I needed to help track social better because Sprinklr was NOT the tool for what I did, we wanted to revamp the website, and we wanted to build up a version of the program to have Insiders earn rewards.\
\
_Well_, my team ended up butting heads with the feedback engineering manager often over priorities, and my last three Connects had something mentioning "working better with others" when it came to conflicting priorities (though my last one called out specifically that I am autistic and working on my CBT). I can be a bit stubborn when I'm challenged, my brain translates it as someone treating me as if I'm dumb and I _do not_ react kindly when I feel like this. Thanks to emotional regulation issues, it's much harder for me to wait to respond with more thought when this happens.\
\
It was rare that the Edge team made me feel this way, but there were times I felt this from partners who looked at my title and decided I was not technically inclined. I worked very hard on carefully choosing my words and _attempting_ (improving with practice, to my credit) to reduce my emotional reaction in certain situations. I learned humility, humbleness, and the art of convincing others to prioritize my work within my first year being on the Edge team, in large part thanks to this re-org.\
\
A happy ending here: that engineering manager and I bonded pretty well over our shared frustrations in general, we ended up discovering that it wasn't her who was causing the priority issues.\
\
Now it's early 2021, I've suffered my second confirmed disc rupture (maybe actually the 4th or 5th looking back on my life), and it was now time to work with my medical team to get a breast reduction. To kick that off I received a diagnosis of _big ole titties_ ([macromastia](https://www.merriam-webster.com/medical/macromastia)); I had already lost 60 pounds (~27 kg), practiced [a 16/8 intermittent fasting diet](https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/16-8-intermittent-fasting) for my diabetes, and active daily. I talk about this because this little thing (lol, _little_) <b>drastically</b> improved my self-confidence.\
\
Do you know what a cocky autistic person looks like? Of course you do, it's what Elon Musk has been doing for the past couple years in the public eye. But confidence and I went a different route after my breast reduction; I was more humble thanks to my experience but comfortable in my skin and felt more like _me_ than I ever have in my life. It's important to note that I've wanted a breast reduction since I was 17; I have always had a much larger breast size than what should fit on my body, and the disc ruptures helped justify the surgery (which itself is a whole other story).\
\
At the end of August, 4 weeks post-surgery, I visited my mom while she was hosting my cousin - the same one who received a diagnosis of BPD a few years prior. This was an amazing bonding experience because I hadn't seen this cousin since 2001. We talked a lot about mental health, childhood abuse, our oddly similar lives despite living across the country from each other, and the fact that my cousin was chasing an autism diagnosis. I took the [AQ-10](https://embrace-autism.com/aq-10/), a brief online version of the autism assessment, after they explained that the website was [created by a neuropsychologist](https://embrace-autism.com/about/) who wanted easier access to this information available.\
\
I dug more into symptoms for autistic women, and _holy shit_ - everything made sense. My _brother_ is autistic, our _maternal grandfather_ didn't speak until he was 3 so we're pretty sure he was autistic, and my cousin is my _mother's_ sister's child - the dots were lining up. My <b>9/10</b> score was not too much of a shock after this research (NINE OUTTA TEN, BABY) and I used that score to help get an appointment with a neuropsychologist who specializes in diagnosing autistic women. I chatted with her about a month after reaching out on her website and got an appointment for testing in March 2022; the wait was worth it. This initial call made me realize things like me adjusting my seams on my clothing, pushing hair off of my skin, making sure my food didn't touch, and pain tolerance were all related to sensory issues that came with my particular autism. _*more light bulb clicks*_ Unfortunately, things at work quickly spiraled after this. Fun story time!\
\
In late 2021, Buy Now, Pay Later was introduced into the Edge browser with a _huge_ amount of backlash. I helped the PM from the Shopping team draft the comms for the announcement to the Edge Insiders and went in with good faith that they knew what they were doing. I didn't do much research into the impact of BNPL services on those who are neurodivergent and in low income areas, but I also hadn't seen anything from the community that would have screamed "don't do this shit". I knew _of_ the services, personally didn't use them because I'm hyper-aware of not messing up my credit, and the PM was really good at giving me and my team all the benefits of the implementation. I came back from our first family vacation in Hawai'i to the largest PR disaster I've ever been involved with, which my _amazing_ direct report shielded me from until I was back in office. (_Alex, I will never be able to repay you for that_ 😭🙏)\
\
While I was spending my anniversary doing a coffee farm tour, the [announcement post](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/articles/introducing-buy-now-pay-later-in-microsoft-edge/m-p/2967030/) went up and <b>_everyone hated it_</b>. It was an _immediate_ explosion. Alex, bless her, tried her _fucking best_ to get people to pay attention to the negative reactions and stressed that it was _not_ normal in our community to get this kind of visceral reaction. Vendors at Microsoft often need an FTE backup even if they are more experienced than the FTEs they work with, so when I got back and caught up I had to actively step in to stress the kind of situation this was, drag in people's managers, and petition leadership to listen. Everyone seemed to be furious it was being implemented.\
\
Buy Now, Pay Later payments disproportionally affect those with impulse control issues, those in low-income areas, as well impacting the credit of those who don't make payments - [up to 43%](https://www.consumerreports.org/shopping-retail/hidden-risks-of-buy-now-pay-later-plans-a7495893275/) of people using these services. When those points were brought up to people in leadership positions who could do something about it, nothing seemed to be enough to change course. We were told that it was the messaging that ruined the entire announcement, and that people just wanted something to be mad about or they simply hated new things.\
\
I mention this not to call anyone out, but so you understand the ridiculous amount of stress I went through; from high on life, thinking things were changing at Microsoft for the good, to absolutely wrecked within a couple weeks. _My job was to bring these angry voices to the people who would make a change, why weren't the right people listening to the users? <b>What is the point of my job?</b>_ I had full on career existential crisis that continued until I was laid off over a year later.\
\
If you're keeping track, I've just explained the course of 5 months from end of July to end of November 2021. The end of 2021 was such a roller coaster for me, I was praying that 2022 would be better. (We all know it wasn't, cue more external stressors.)\
\
Alex left Microsoft in early 2022 and I legit did not know what I was going to do with myself for a bit; she kept me afloat, now I had to train someone new on top of still trying to find out what my purpose on the team was. I was drowning with negative social media posts and I just inherited the ticketed support service from a teammate who moved to another Edge group, putting more responsibilities on my shoulders that I also needed to balance. I suffered from a severe amount of burnout from November through March, largely due to absorbing all the negative emotions being thrown at me; burnout I don't think I'm truly recovered from - I am scarred deep from that situation.\
\
March comes and I finally get to take my autism test. <b>I cannot understate how much this diagnosis changed everything for me.</b> I had an answer, one that _felt right_. It wasn't just autism, though, no no! I got the surprise diagnosis of ADHD Inattentive type.\
\
Unexpected emotions came with this. I reflected on my life and realized all the times we unintentionally abused the autistic qualities out of me; where I was made fun of for being weird, my teachers calling me a motormouth but being part of gifted & talented programs, making sure my food didn't touch despite it all going to the same place, my lack of filter... everything made so much more sense, but I went through a period of mourning. I could have had a different life, I think, and it was heartbreaking experiencing this hindsight. If I hadn't gone through what I have I would _not_ be the person I am today.\
\
However, getting these diagnoses helped me find my center again; I had a new purpose in life and on the team - being successful with autism as an example of autism that breaks the mold. I decided to found and lead the Neurodiverse@Edge Employee Resource Group because there wasn't a section on the team - I needed to create a space that would be truly safe for those of us ND-types who are not comfortable being open about our diagnoses, offer guidance to colleagues and managers on how to best support their ND peers and direct reports as allies, and be a support system for the group.\
\
In my diagnosis report, I learned a lot about myself and new tools that I could use to help with my deficiencies. I learned that my verbal comprehension is higher than my non-verbal. "Thinking out loud" is something I _have_ to do if I want my brain to work faster; if I forget a word that I am trying to recall, I'll start talking to myself about the connections to that word my brain keeps pulling, it's super effective. I was introduced to [mind mapping](https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=5nTuScU70As) - I thought I was organized before with my note taking and task organization I did in a daily planner, but this _blew. my. mind_.\
\
I dove deep into how to use this tool designed to help improve memory and found one program that would cover everything I needed, [Xmind](https://xmind.app/). It combines the functionality on a tablet I wanted for tactile input and the _~A E S T H E T I C~_ customizations I crave - UX and UI are both incredibly important to me. To learn how to use a mind map, my first attempt was planning my in-law's visit happening a month later. My _gods_, people, I caught onto how easy this was for my brain instantly - I could create buckets of categories that made sense to me, and as I added more information I could see other buckets that could be built, then easily moved the items that should be in that new category.\
\
I now use it for _everything_ that needs coordination - company research for interviews, tracking what TV shows we're watching on what platform (including what's off season and cancelled), and work task tracking. I built up a template that I could duplicate every week to copy my daily tasks I was tracking and organize my work projects. I used to write my to-do lists and notes by hand but with the mind map I could just copy from the previous week, paste into the week I am organizing, easily drag and drop the list to the subsequent days, and create separate sheets within the same map to keep that week's meeting notes separated from my tasks. I never lost a note, and I didn't have to go digging through pages of a planner just to find something from weeks ago.\
\
I became a new force to reckon with; thanks to this productivity tool I was able to output more work than some of my peers while I was on a reduced work schedule due to my most recent disc rupture (5 or 6 now? I've lost count) from August - October 2022. I drove a Hackathon project to completion during this time, with our project winning 2nd place in our category. [I will word vomit to _anyone_](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/missyquarry_auadhd-mindmapping-activity-7031682126634778624-I_wi/) the good word that is mind mapping and _especially_ stress that neurodivergent people who suffer from working memory and executive function issues adopt this form of organization.\
\
I also adopted the use of focus features in Apple products like the background noise using the stream setting. Music _can_ be used for background noise, but it's more often than not a distraction for those with ADHD, pulling you into the lyrics of a good song and away from the work you were doing. Noise-cancelling headphones are <b>a must have</b> for someone with sensory issues, something I didn't realize I had until working with my son's behavioral specialists and the _click_ of the light bulb where he got his from.\
\
My specific audio sensory issue is that I can focus on anything I want to, often _when I don't_ want to, with my ears picking up nearly everything around me. I can focus on specific sounds even in a crowded room; having noise-cancelling headphones with the stream playing helps me focus without the loudness of my environment. Monday mornings I blocked out 45-60 minutes first thing in my work hours so that I could ensure my weekly mind map was created. To help with my memory recollection, I started blocking out "focus" time for 15 minutes after meetings to organize tasks and projects on my mind map before moving on to the next thing.\
\
Not once did I get pushback when I politely asked whoever set up a meeting with me to move it 15 minutes forward to accommodate for those breaks; in fact, I often get back a "holy crap, that's a great idea, I should start that!" ([You really should start](https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7047620126023503872/), regardless.) I started working in chunks of time, used away messages/statuses on Teams to prompt people to leave me detailed notes when they want information from me (_No Hello, please!_), and drew a thicker work/life balance line to support my unique capabilities.\
\
Picking all of these tools up meant I also had to advocate more for myself. I sent an email to my fellow org PMs detailing my diagnosis and what I was doing to shift how I worked moving forward. The reaction to that email was nothing but support and callouts that what I am doing will work for even the neurotypical! It took me about a month to fold all of these changes into my processes, mind mapping has a _super heavy lift_ up front, and I spent a lot of time setting up inbox zero for more organization. These all helped me be more successful during my last year on the Edge team, <b>all because I got that diagnosis of autism</b>. Whichever company hires me next is getting a high performer who knows her limits and superpowers, along with the organizational skills of a robot.\
\
It's ridiculous, this world was built for average and so many of us _just don't fit that_. I _literally_ cannot function like the average person and expecting the neurodivergent to conform has caused us severe stress by essentially [abusing out what makes us unique](https://childmind.org/article/controversy-around-applied-behavior-analysis/). That's honestly my whole point of this post series, to bring to light how neurodivergent people can experience life, particularly if they don't know they _are_ ND and/or they don't advocate for themselves. [Being neurodivergent is an advantage](https://hbr.org/2017/05/neurodiversity-as-a-competitive-advantage) in the tech industry, "... [autistic people in the right environment can be 140% more productive than their peers](https://www.spartaglobal.com/learn-and-media/equaltech-report-2023-neurodiversity-in-tech/)". Yes, I _can_ prove that I am that productive. Yet we still have "personality" tests barring autistic people and those with ADHD from qualifying, force people through stressful assignments just for an interview, and _I can't prove it but_ I sometimes feel that when I self-describe that have a disability I am immediately tossed aside (_[I'm not the only autistic person noticing this pattern](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/deborah-lalush_tech-design-activity-7048692879069753344-SE25), either_).\
\
Despite many tech companies actively sourcing autistic talent, hiring that talent is still [a huge fucking problem](https://web.archive.org/web/20211019144046/https://www.mcgregor-boyall.com/our-thinking-library/2021/02/neurodiversity-in-the-tech-industry/243), especially when you can't say what disability you have when you self-describe (and I'm aware of _so many_ ND peeps who have been let go from tech companies this year 😔). A lot of internal support or programs are nothing but lip service, touting a space of psychological safety while rewarding those who actively make teams toxic and unsafe by promoting them into higher positions of power.\
\
Leadership teams expect the work needed for cultural improvements to be from the ground up when it should be a collaborative effort driven by leadership, top down, _but also_ ground up from the individual contributors and their managers. I'm a supporter of burning down the entire system we have, so I'm sure it won't surprise you that I believe to properly be inclusive and diverse we need to get rid of everyone in a C-Suite position at most tech companies and redo it all.\
\
I didn't want to end this on a rant, but that's how things go with me, I suppose. I'm sad that I didn't who I really am until my mid-30s, I probably wouldn't have ruined so many friendships or burned bridges at places of employment. I want my story to be out there so that maybe I will be that "Halsey moment" to someone that she was for me - showing that you can be successful regardless of having a disability that affects your executive function. And hopefully you learned something new about me - "never would have guessed" is something I am told often, and to that I say, "Yeah, [that's unconsciously intentional](https://www.autism.org.uk/advice-and-guidance/professional-practice/autistic-masking)."\
\
-🧜‍♀️🦄