---
layout: post
author: the cyborg
title: Being an autistic woman in an industry that thinks it's neurotypical - Part 1
permalink: 'archived/being-audhd-pt-1'
---

<details>
<summary><b>AUTHOR NOTE</b></summary>
<i>This was originally posted on my WordPress blog, which I have deleted after migrating the blog's posts to this website in November 2025. Differences from the original are minimal and include: rephrasing "neurodiverse" as "neurodivergent" throughout the post, changed a few things to make more grammatical sense, and created more paraphraphs to reduce the wall of text feel.</i>
</details>
\
It's April, which means it's Autism Acceptance Month! The tech industry believes it to be a space where average people can make a difference in the world, but more often than not these high performing employees are neurodivergent in a neurotypical world.\
\
<b>Obligatory note: When you meet someone with autism, you have met _one person_ with autism.</b> We are all unique individuals with a variety of superpowers (some don't even like that term!), and my experiences are not reflective of the overall neurodivergent community. Are you on the neurodivergent spectrum or think you may be? I'd love to hear your experiences! I'm 100% down to help you navigate this world and how you can be the best you possible. 🥰\
\
Before I begin, I implore you, <b>_do not_</b> support Autism Speaks, spread the puzzle piece, or _speak for_ autistic people. Make room for us to have our own voices this month - we don't need your help to be vocal, but we do need your help in elevating our experiences and needs, so take some time this month to make sure you spread the right kind of voices.\
\
I'm gonna start this with: Do you realize what all I <b>need</b> to do to ensure my anxiety is under control in this ridiculous world? Unless I've told you directly, probably not. [Anxiety is often a comorbidity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conditions_comorbid_to_autism_spectrum_disorders) of both autism and ADHD, and it's quite common to be treated for anxiety when you have either of those. I was diagnosed with bipolar II and severe general anxiety in 2007 and I need 1) an anticonvulsant used as a mood stabilizer to help with my big swings, 2) a traditional mood stabilizer to help sedate me, improve my sleep quality, and keep my anxiety down, 3) an as-needed anti-anxiety medication when things get way fucked, and 4) I constantly use [Cognitive Behavior Therapy](https://www.apa.org/ptsd-guideline/patients-and-families/cognitive-behavioral) techniques to bring me back to my center.\
\
I'm convinced a large part of this is needed because people value "normal" over "uniqueness" thanks to capitalism, and it's a huge reason why I would love to just go live on an island tending a community farm far away from tech ([Ancient Dreams in a Modern Land](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_V17JN76uxc) is a mood for this). The tech industry is _full_ of neurodivergent people, yet those in charge are in general Boomer age (_or have Boomer ideologies_), think people who get mental health help are "weak" or "snowflakes", and often tell their employees to "deal with it". This leads to excessive stress which leads to over-medication which leads to a lot of people feeling like they are not valued as a human.\
\
Now that's out of the way, this post is _part 1_ of two about my career experiences before and after my autism diagnosis, focusing on before I was an FTE at Microsoft (part 2 will be about my time on Edge and after my diagnosis). [Autism Level 1](https://psychcentral.com/autism/levels-of-autism) was originally called Asperger's, but _we don't talk about him anymore_ ([bad Nazi doing bad experiments](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hans_Asperger), you should avoid using the term 'Aspie' for this reason).\
<br>
<details>
<summary><b>AUTHOR'S NOTE, Nov 2025</b></summary>
<i>Past Missy lied, there are actually 3 parts to this series, the third is in drafts as of publishing this.</i>
</details>
\
After I was first diagnosed with bipolar II, I learned that working overnights is _terrible_ for bipolar brains. Who's got two thumbs and was working overnights at Walmart at the time? _This bitch_. We lived in Colorado (where I was raised) and before this diagnosis I already did a ton of damage to my unfocused career.\
\
I exploded at my first job, a bowling alley, because I asked one of my coworkers for a pretzel and cheese from the food counter and he sent back a _Slimfast_. As I stormed out, I chucked the can at his head (_I missed, unfortunately_), stopped by the Manager's office to take off my work shirt and throw it with my badge at the Assistant Manager's face, then I walked out.\
\
I worked at a Denny's briefly overnights where I was accused of taking meth in the bathroom because I am...uh...too cheery? Wish I was joking about that one. 😑\
\
While I was in trade school to be a mechanic, I worked at a KFC/A&W with a school mate. I hated smelling like chicken all the time so I quit to be a nanny for my old neighbor and a friend of hers. I guess my roommate didn't like some of that and while I was at my mom's one extended weekend, that roommate packed all her shit up leaving behind a note and a few ceramic pigs that told me how horrible I was; said pigs were violently introduced to the wall when I read the letter. (To this day I still don't know what I did to deserve that but _her_ credit got fucked because she didn't break the lease properly. 😂)\
\
I worked in customer service for Microcenter where I kept getting horrible anxiety every day I had to work so I sabotaged that by just...not showing up anymore.\
\
All this was within 4 years, 2003-2007, and these are _only the job things_ - I burned a lot more bridges with friends and my husband (then boyfriend) during this time, too.\
\
After my bipolar diagnosis, I moved to the day shift at the customer service counter for Walmart. I started medications to control the mood swings, and went through so many before I found the "right" one - I ended up on depakote for a couple years. When we decided we wanted to leave Colorado for the Pacific Northwest in 2008, we moved in with my mother-in-law so that we could save up money for the move across the US.\
\
_spoiler_: we didn't save anything because we both have ADHD and planning ahead was not a specialty of ours. 😅\
\
But during that time I worked with my mother-in-law as a virtual assistant helping with content creation and editing videos for her clients, and I'm _pretty sure_ I stopped taking my medication and focused solely on CBT. Genuinely can't recall anymore.\
\
In 2010, we decided I needed a "real" job (_lol_) and my husband saw that a company he used to work for, iBeta, wanted some software testers. He convinced me to apply by telling me, "It's your favorite thing, pointing out other people's flaws!" That line actually worked in the interview, and for a year I worked as a software and hardware tester for SMART boards and monitors. To this day, this is _my favorite_ way that explains how I got into tech. I continued to have anxiety issues that would make me call out of work more often than I probably should have; my manager there told me that I would be significantly better at my job if I put more effort into making sure I was around. I didn't know at the time that I should have been advocating for my anxiety this early in my career, and I wish I did.\
\
It's 2011 now and we finally had enough to move up to Oregon - except we only _thought_ we did and that entire situation was a mess, too. 😬 My first job in Portland, Oregon I lasted only 3 months doing iPhone and iPad phone support. I'm pretty sure that I ruptured a disc because I could not sit for extended periods or in certain ways, but we had no health insurance (_because call centers treat their employees like chicken_) so I had no way to find out what was really happening. Since I couldn't take any time off to recover (_because how dare call center employees get hurt or sick_), I was unfortunately let go.\
\
Instead of getting another corporate job, I started building up my own business making jewelry by crowdsourcing funds to buy tools. I taught myself how to solder, learned I could make things in 3D form really well (_I always thought I wasn't artistic_), and managed to get a little money out of it. But...me not finding a stable job really hurt us. The cost of that was needing to separate from my husband, give up two of our three cats, and move in with my parents in southern Oregon. My husband still had a job - the one that would eventually change our lives - so he stayed up in Portland by himself working as phone support for Xbox.\
\
When I moved back to Portland mid-2012, I ended up getting a job with the husband unit doing phone support for Xbox. The very first phone call I took during training my trainer pulled my husband aside and said, "She sounds like she's done this her whole life, she's a _natural_." Inside, I was terrified, felt like my voice was wavering, and got an adrenaline rush that gave me a headache and the shakes because of my anxiety. It's amazing what masking your entire life lets you do.\
\
Like I noted in <a href="/archived/art-of-empathy">my post about empathy</a>, I was _really_ good at what I did for Xbox, especially once I got confidence in my skills. I was a networking specialist, only one of two women who were on that team. Would you believe that I could easily take my troubleshooting skills from being a trained diesel engine and heavy duty transmission mechanic and fold it into networking? This role taught me how technically-inclined I truly am; I could do in-depth, technical conversations with users and find answers outside of the troubleshooting built into the support tool we used.\
\
As support agents, we helped scale up a new call center building in Wilsonville, Oregon and during that transition an opening on the Games for Windows Live team became available. This was a highly desired role within in the call center - they had pretty low call volume and most of the time the answer was "turn off your antivirus". I scored that seat (the only woman agent on the team with a woman manager) the same time my husband got selected to go up to Redmond and help the Xbox supportability PMs build up the networking section and troubleshooting flows for the original Xbox One.\
\
I am _still_ shocked at how well I did at the call center for someone who hates talking to people, but this role is the first one I can see the excessive amount of masking and compensation I was doing to get through things. For example, I got back onto an as-needed anti-anxiety medication so that I wouldn't sabotage yet another job (lorazepam), found a group of people who were similar to me, and made some new life-long friends.\
\
My husband ended up impressing one of the FTEs for Xbox Community Support, and that man (hi, James, if you ever read this!) worked hard to get both of us up to the Seattle area and working on his team. I also mentioned in my empathy post that I was told by my first lead on Xbox, "You talk to _problems_, not _people_." I did not realize that my "learning" empathy and how to engage in text form as a company representative was a form of autistic compensating. I have always been known for not having a filter from my brain to my mouth, not thinking how people would react to a) _what_ I was saying and b) _how_ I was saying it. Tbh, sometimes I still don't give a shit - sometimes you need that blunt slap in the face because a lot of people won't do it. I am that friend who will give it to you straight. _Shit, I lost track of where I was going with this._\
\
Oh, _right_, how I got unfairly fired from Xbox Community Support due to my lack of filter, directly related to my autism. 🙂‍↕️\
\
I started as a support forums agent, helped launch the Xbox Support handle on Reddit, and moved into a Community Manager role for the Xbox Ambassadors. A beloved staff member of the Ambassadors, I had a rough day and snapped at a community member for being a shithead in Discord. I wasn't _bad_ about it, he was ranting about something he was upset with, and I said, "Be constructive or be quiet." I'll be the first to say I recognize I could have done better there. Very shortly after the exchange this community member left the Discord server. He was _well known_ for this when he would throw a fit, so it wasn't anything new, and I honestly didn't even notice because he was still talking to me in private messages.\
\
But someone on the team decided that this course of events meant I pushed him out of the community and made it an unsafe space for the rest. <b>_Except it wasn't my interaction with him that made him leave_</b>. No one involved with my firing asked the community member what happened, no one talked to other community members like the volunteer moderators who were there, no one talked to _me_ about the situation. About a week after the incident, I get pulled into a room and told that because he left the server after that interaction I was being fired. The member this was centered around tried to petition the team to listen, but they weren't having it. Mentions of me in the Discord server were removed, a petition on the forums was ignored, my ex-colleagues mostly shunned me. To this day, I (and several others) fully believe that one "bad" interaction after 4 years _did not_ warrant me getting fired.\
\
And that's how I accidentally sabotaged a job _I fucking loved_ by not having a filter thanks to autism, and man if I had known then what I know now things might have gone way different. (Like, _probably not getting fired in the first place_, for example.)\
\
During my time on XCS from 2014-2018, I discovered Halsey (_who didn't at this point, amirite_?), learned that she's openly bipolar and was stoked to see someone like me sing about their experiences. Most of her Badlands album is just a call to my soul, but Gasoline, Castle, and Control are 3 songs that I relate to the most. My cousin was re-diagnosed from bipolar to [borderline personality disorder](https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/borderline-personality-disorder/symptoms-causes/syc-20370237) closer to the end of this period, maybe 2017 or 2018.\
\
It got me re-evaluating my diagnosis of bipolar as something a little more so I went to a psychologist to get on mood stabilizing medication again and talk more about BPD. I was put on Lamictal then for my bipolar, told that we should focus on the symptoms and not the diagnosis (_fine_ 🙄), and then released once the Lamictal controlled my swings and anxiety. Despite the lack of support for a new diagnosis from this psych, I will _<b>forever</b>_ state that Lamictal saved my life, my relationships, and my career.\
\
The role I had after XCS taught me that I _love_ machine learning. As a content analyst for a conversational AI, I learned how to speak to a machine and realized that coding is quite literally simply learning another language - it's just for machines, and my analytical brain _easily_ understood the logic. This was novel to me - while at Xbox I taught myself some SQL so that I could do some stuff I was responsible, but what I didn't realize is I was so good at learning it because of a boosted processing speed. As a space nerd, this gave me the itch to teach myself Python and R to start scanning images from NASA to help identify planets (before the James Webb telescope launch).\
\
The tool we used was rule-based to make sure our chat bot Zo didn't go Nazi like [Tay](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tay_(chatbot)), as is the case with most conversational AIs, but the rules weren't block or allowlists, _they were English_. It was teaching the machine how to _contextually_ understand English; this opens up the ability to support the intersectionality and range of emotions of the human condition by a machine that's used to strict rules. We built synonym groups including slang terms, did pen testing to ensure we were controlling the fairness levels appropriately, and I got to experience what it was like working directly on an engineering team...\
\
Except I wasn't _exactly_ on the engineering team and got talked to a few times for working on this tool when I was just a social media manager for Zo because it _wasn't part of my responsibilities_. The engineer who built that tool will tell you that I understand his tool almost as good as he does - I found bugs that no one had thought to look for, and we made that program so much better over the short time that I was a content analyst before the project was defunded. This role helped me fully understand the need for inclusive and fair technology, something I bring to every role now.\
\
That team experience was an eye opener which showed me how well I can work on engineering teams and that my performance was significantly better than others when I'm passionate about something. It's also directly how I landed a role on the Microsoft Edge team after Zo was retired, with my then-manager pushing me towards the community position she realized she wasn't gonna be a good fit for. Moving from partner to vendor at Microsoft showed me the impact I could make and the speed in which Microsoft moves, but becoming an FTE at the end of 2019 showed me the true firehose of information and workload you get. This is overwhelming for someone who is aware of their weaknesses, significantly more so for someone who is unaware of their diagnoses, strengths, and weaknesses.\
\
Soon, I'll post part 2 to talk about my experience on the Microsoft Edge team before and after my diagnosis - something that I feel is really important to differentiate between. Until then!\
\
-🧜‍♀️🦄
